.TH "SPIKELESS" "8" "2014-07-30" "GNU Pony" "GNU Pony Manual"
.SH NAME
spikeless - A lesser Spike, one without package management
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B
spikeless
\fISCROLL\fR \fISTARTDIR\fR \fIPINPAL\fR [private]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
.B
spikeless
is a minimal subset of \fBspike\fR. It is used solely
for installating package, it cannot be used to do anything
else and it cannot track installed packages.
.B
spikeless
itself is used by spike to install package, but can be
used by itself test installing package to somewhere else
and then simply delete that directory.
.PP
.B
spikeless
was written so that Spike scrolls could be written and
tested while Spike is in early developement.
.PP
.B
spikeless
has three positional manditory arguments:
.TP
.I scroll
The scroll-file to install.
.TP
.I startdir
The directory where files are to be downloaded
and stored whilst the package is being compiled.
.TP
.I pinpal
The root directroy of the system the package is
to be installed to. For example, if the package
contains the file \fI/usr/bin/spike\fR and this
argument is \fI/mnt\fR, that file will be stored
as \fI/mnt/usr/bin/spike\fR.
.PP
Additionally, if the fourth argument, without
the scroll file as the first argument, is the
word "private", the package will be installed
as a private package.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.PP
Written by Mattias Andrée <maandree@member.fsf.org>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.TP
\fBspike\fR(8)
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
.PP
Copyright (C) 2014  Mattias Andrée
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
